Helping Hand

Helping Hand is an Android application that was developed as a course project for IAT 359 "Mobile Computing" at Simon Fraser University

Helping Hand is a senior's care mobile application which provides support to elderly users living independantly. It does this by reminding them of the medication they need and when to take them, adding appointments to their device's calendar, and allowing them to find their current location if they are lost; all of this in one convenient package.

Perhaps most importantly, this app provides peace of mind to themselves and their loved ones as it can alert an emergency contact if an accident occurs. If the user falls down with their phone, the device will sense the fall and initiate contact with a pre-determined individual. Additionally, if the user needs to make an emergency call or text, there is a clear "Emergency Help" button for them to use.

The final design of the application focused on minimal text, large font, and large buttons to ensure legibility. While the application isn't the most aesthetically pleasing, I found these choices to be important given that many seniors suffer from a decline in visual abilities, and I wanted to the app to afford easy navigation for a user in a stressful situation such as an accident or being lost. The chosen palette of blues and oranges with green and red call-to-action buttons were all run through a colour blindness tester to maintain accessibility and confirm how those colours translated for colour blind users.

In this final deliverable, I accomplished the basic and standard functionality that I had proposed for the application in the first milestone of the assignment. The application's fall detection was achieved by accessing the device's accelerometer and triggering the "FallAlert" screen when the sensor registered at a faster speed than what was expected, simulating a fall or a sudden movement. To allow for discrepencies, the "FallAlert" screen has buttons to call for help or for a false alarm.

The Add Contact and Emergency Call features were implemented next. "Add Contact" allowed the user to save a specific emergency contact in Shared Preferences, saving their name, phone number, and contact method (call, text, or both) as key-value pairs.

If an emergency call was initiated from a fall or from the "EMERGENCY HELP" button on the home page, then the application would access the device's SharedPreferences to retrieve the strings for name, phone number, and contact method. A series of if-else statements first determines that there are valid strings for those three variables, and returns a Toast message to the user to tell them that no contact data was found. Afterwards, the if-else statements determines whether the contact method is "callContact", "textContact", or "callAndTextContact". From there, the application uses Intents to launch the phone app with that number to call or send an SMS message.

The list of Medications was handled by a SQLite database, built by the items provided by the user. This database could be viewed in two separate lists for morning and evening medications. The Appointments feature allows the user to add appointments to their device's calendar by using Intents to insert the calendar data provided by the user and then notifying the user of the completed task with a Toast message. The finall feature added was the Map View, which used Google Maps and the device's GPS to show the user on a map where they are.

The current application provides a minimal viable product given the time constraints from the course. If I go forward to refine this app, I would implement the full functionality that I had envisioned for the Medication, Appointment, and Map features. With the Medication feature, I wanted to show in-application reminders. The application wound vibrate and remind them to take medicine at specific times of day and ask them to confirm when it had been taken. If not, it would note that instance and have a catalogue of forgotten medication to be shown to their care taker or doctor. Similarly, for the user's appointments, I also wanted the app to either have it's own calendar or to receive a reminder within the app for the upcoming appointment. This could be solved by implementing a time for the reminder within the existing "Add Appointment" function. Finally, the Map view currently returns the user's latitude and longitude, which is not practical information for most people. I would edit this to display the location in common address format, which could be achieved by reading Google Maps documentation further and editing the code to return a proper address. This address could also be incoporated into the emergency text messages sent out by the app, allowing the emergency contact to go straight to the user's location. 

This application was built in Android Studio using Java for the app's functionality and XML for styling. 
